feat(docs): ADR-119 : Mempool DOG (#4493)
cometbft/cometbft: docs/references/architecture/adr-119-dog-mempool-gossip.md

signals to the peers that they should delete all routing information related to this node. This assures that, in case the network topology changes, or a peer becomes unavailable, the node is able to discover transactions via a previously disabled route. 

### Redundancy control

In an ideal setting, receiving a transaction more than once is not needed. But in a Byzantine setting, allowing for only one route for a transaction can introduce an attack vector. 

Operators can thus configure a desired redundancy and the gossip protocol will adjust route disabling based on this setting. Redundancy is defined as the ratio between duplicate and unique transactions. Operators can also define how much they tolerate the redundancy to deviate from the desired level.

By default, the redundancy is set to 1 and impacts the gossiping of transactions as follows:

```
  redundancy := duplicateTxs / firstTimeTxs
  if redundancy < r.redundancyLowerBound:
    peer.send(Reset)
  if redundancy > redundancyUpperBound
    enableRouteDisabling() 
```

Redundancy is adjusted whenever a new transaction is added into the mempool.
(TODO - revisit whether this should also be done on duplicates.)

> ### Impacted areas of code

Reviewer: The `Mempool` interface will have a new method `GetSenders(txKey types.TxKey) ([]nodekey.ID, error)`, and the `Entry` interface, `Senders() []nodekey.ID`.

#### Mempool reactor

The bulk of the changes is constrained to the mempool reactor. 
We introduce a new communication channel, called `Mempool Control Channel`. The channel
is used to transmit the messages needed for the implementation of the protocol. 

Additionally, the mempool reactor is extended with a 
`gossipRouter` and a `redundancyControl` struct to keep track of the redundancy
of transactions in the system. 
Each node is keeps track of the routes it disabled between its peers. 

```
type gossipRouter struct {
	mtx cmtsync.RWMutex
	// A set of `source -> target` routes that are disabled for disseminating transactions. Source
	// and target are node IDs.
	disabledRoutes map[nodekey.ID]p2pIDSet
}
``` 

```
type redundancyControl struct {
	txsPerAdjustment int64

	// Pre-computed upper and lower bounds of accepted redundancy.
	lowerBound float64
	upperBound float64

	mtx          cmtsync.RWMutex
	firstTimeTxs int64 // number of transactions received for the first time
	duplicates   int64 // number of duplicate transactions

	// If true, do not send HaveTx messages.
	blockHaveTx atomic.Bool
}

```

> 

Reviewer: In addition to the new data structures, I would include the changes to the current code. 
- Handling of new messages in `Receive` function, in the new channel.
- Extend `TryAddTx` to count first-time and duplicate txs; reply with a `HaveTx` message if tx is in cache. 
- Filter disabled routes in `broadcastTxRoutine` (only if DOG is enabled, otherwise keep filtering senders as in the current code).
- New logic on `RemovePeer`.

Reviewer: It's important to emphasize that the new code does not change the current behaviour.

#### New p2p messages

The protocol introduces two new p2p messages whose protobuf definition is given below:

```
type HaveTx struct {
	TxKey []byte 
}
```

```
type Reset struct {

}
```

#### Monitoring

This ADR introduces a set of metrics which can be used to observe the parameters of the protocol. 

> - `HaveTxMsgsReceived`

Reviewer: I don't think we need all these metrics in the final version. I would like to see the redundancy level, but instead of `Redundancy` I would replace it with two new metrics `FirstTimeTxs` and `DuplicateTxs` from where we can compute redundancy. In fact we already have the number of duplicates in `AlreadyReceivedTxs`.

Author: I removed the HaveTx and Reset msgs from the metrics but I left redundancy. I think it's still beneficial to have it pre-computed because we reset these values (`FirstTimeTxs` and `DuplicateTxs`) periodically and the operator might not adjust the computation correctly. Not sure if it would be a problem but it's safer if we just compute it.

Reviewer: I forgot that `DuplicateTxs` is not the same as `AlreadyReceivedTxs` because the first one is reset on every adjustment. Anyway, we would still need to consider `FirstTimeTxs` and `DuplicateTxs` instead of `Redudancy`.
In many testnets I saw that dividing the `DuplicateTxs` metric by the `FirstTimeTxs` metric is more precise than the `Redundancy` metric.

Reviewer: In the end we decided to leave only `Redundancy`. `FirstTimeTxs` and `DuplicateTxs` were useful for the initial experiments but will not be needed for nodes in production.

- `ResetMsgsSent`
- `DisabledRoutes`
- `Redundancy`

The impact of the protocol on operations can also be observed by looking at the following metrics that already exist:

-`AlreadyReceivedTx` - the number of redundant transactions. When DOG is enabled these values should drop. 

-`BytesReceived` - This metric shows the number of bytes received per message type. Without DOG, the transactions dominate the number of bytes, while, when enabled, the block parts dominate.

Newly introduced metrics are: 

- `HaveTxMsgsReceived` -  Number of HaveTx messages received (cumulative). 

- `ResetMsgsSent` - Number of Reset messages sent (cumulative).

- `DisabledRoutes` - Number of disabled routes.

- `Redundancy` -  The current level of redundancy computed as the ratio between duplicate and unique transactions. 

### Configuration parameters

> - `config.EnableDOGProtocol: bool`: Enabling or disabling the DOG protocol

Reviewer: Ideally, on the final version we would leave just one configuration: `EnableDOGProtocol`. For the other parameters described in the spec (`TargetRedundancy`, `TargetRedundancyDeltaPercent`, and (now) `AdjustInverval`) I would try to define values based on the experiments, and then make them constants  in the code. Currently, those numbers are `TargetRedundancy = 0.5`, `TargetRedundancyDeltaPercent = 20`, and `AdjustInverval = 1000`.

Reviewer: We need to decide if `EnableDOGProtocol` will be `true` by default.

> This section does not need to be filled in at the start of the ADR, but must
> be completed prior to the merging of the implementation.
>
> Here are some common questions that get answered as part of the detailed design:
>
> - What are the user requirements?
>
> - What systems will be affected?
>
> - What new data structures are needed, what data structures will be changed?
>
> - What new APIs will be needed, what APIs will be changed?
>
> - What are the efficiency considerations (time/space)?
>
> - What are the expected access patterns (load/throughput)?
>
> - Are there any logging, monitoring or observability needs?
>
> - Are there any security considerations?
>
> - Are there any privacy considerations?
>
> - How will the changes be tested?
>
> - If the change is large, how will the changes be broken up for ease of review?
>
> - Will these changes require a breaking (major) release?
>
> - Does this change require coordination with the SDK or other?

## Consequences

> This section describes the consequences, after applying the decision. All
> consequences should be summarized here, not just the "positive" ones.

### Positive

### Negative

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The new protocol is not compatible with the existing experimental feature that limits disseminating transactions up to a specified number of peers. They cannot be both enabled simultaneously. This needs to be clear in the documentation.
```

# ADR 119: Dynamic Optimal Graph (DOG) gossip protocol

## Changelog

- 2024-11-04: Initial notes (@hvanz and @jmalicevic)
- 2024-11-25: Applied comments from @hvanz and added information on decided metrics (@jmalicevic)

## Status
Accepted: [#3297][tracking-issue].

## Context

The current transaction dissemination protocol of the mempool sends each received 

> transaction to all the peers a node is connected to, except for the sender. 

Author: Based on [this](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/541c4667db44a88914f8b8984ca3013e2e2b3ce8/mempool/mempoolTx.go#L38) I would say it does not send it to any recorded sender.

> transaction to all the peers a node is connected to, except for the sender. 

Reviewer 2: We can receive txs from RPC. There is no sender in this case.

While resilient to Byzantine attacks, this type of transaction gossiping is 
causing a lot of network traffic and nodes receiving duplicate transactions
very frequently. 

Benchmarks have also confirmed a large portion of the sent and received bytes 
is due to transaction gossiping. 

DOG is a protocol that aims to reduce the number of duplicate transactions sent
while maintaining the resilience to attacks. 

## Alternative Approaches

The existing alternative approaches for transaction gossiping are:
- FLOOD - the current transaction gossiping protocol in CometBFT

> - CAT Mempool - the transaction gossiping proposed by Celestia

Reviewer 2: Link?

> - Limiting number of peers to send a transaction to - Experimental protocol in CometBFT

Reviewer 2: Links?

> - Etherium's transaction gossiping protocol.

Reviewer 2: How about a link?

### FLOOD - the current transaction gossiping protocol in CometBFT

Currently, CometBFT gossips each transaction to all the connected peers, except the sender
of the transaction. Thus, for every transaction, CometBFT keeps a list of senders to make sure

> it is not sent again to a node that has sent it. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it is not sent again to a node from which the node has received it.
```

This does not prevent a node to send the transaction to a node that has sent it to the 

> sender, thus creating a lot of duplicates. 

Reviewer 2: This definition of sender is complex...

This is the exact problem DOG was designed to tackle.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### CAT protocol

Content-Addressable Transaction (CAT) is a "push-pull" gossip protocol originally implemented by Celestia on top of CometBFT's priority-mempool (aka v1, previously also in Tendermint Core), which existed in CometBFT until v0.37. 

With CAT, nodes forward ("push") transactions received from users via RPC endpoints to their peers. When a node `A` receives a transaction from another node, it will notify its peers that it has the transaction with a `SeenTx(hash(tx))` message. A node `B`, upon receiving the `SeenTx` message from `A`, will check that if the transaction is in its mempool. If not, it will "pull" the transaction from `A` by sending a `WantTx(hash(tx))` message, to which `A` responds with a `Tx` message carrying the full transaction. While `SeenTx` and `HaveTx` messages are much smaller than `Tx` messages, these additional communication steps introduce latency when disseminating transactions. The CAT protocol was especially designed for networks with low throughput and large transaction sizes. 

Efforts to port the CAT mempool to CometBFT were documented in #2027. Experimental results on a small testnet from #1472 showed that CAT effectively reduces bandwidth usage. However, its impact on latency was not evaluated in those tests. Porting CAT was finally deprioritised in favor of DOG.

```

## Decision

The CometBFT team has decided to implement the protocol on top of the existing mempool
(`flood` ) dissemination protocol, but make it optional. The protocol can be activated/deactivated
via a new config flag `enable_dog_protocol`. More details on this in the sections below. 

## Detailed Design

We start the design section with a general description of how the algorithm works. 

CometBFT caches received transactions and stores the IDs of all the peers that have sent it in a `senders` list. When a transaction enters the mempool,
if it was already received it can be retrieved from the cache. When this happens a certain number of times, the receiving node notifies the sender to stop forwarding any transaction from the peer 
that had originally sent the transaction. The exact point when the notification is sent is defined below as a redundancy threshold. (TODO LiNK)

Namely, let's assume that transaction `tx_1` was sent by node `B` to node `C` which forwarded it to `A`. `A` already has the transaction and notifies node `C` about this. Node `C` will look up the senders of transaction `tx_1` and in the future disable transaction forwarding from node `B` to node `A`.

> In reality, if node `C` ha received `tx_1` from multiple senders (`X`,`Y`, `B`), it will pick the first one that has sent it and disable that route. 

Reviewer 2: The first one, except the first one? I mean, the transaction must be received first, then duplicates are.

Author: At the moment it just gets `senders[0]` and disabls the route between `senders[0]->A`

Node `C` keeps a map of `disabledRoutes` per peer and uses it to determine whether a transaction should be forwarded. 

Entries for a particular peer are reset if a peer sends a `Reset` message or if a peer disconnects. 

### Redundancy control

In an ideal setting, receiving a transaction more than once is not needed. But in a Byzantine setting, allowing for only one route for a transaction can introduce an attack vector. 

Operators can thus configure a desired redundancy and the gossip protocol will adjust route disabling based on this setting. Redundancy is defined as the ratio between duplicate and unique transactions. 

<!-- Operators can also define how much they tolerate the redundancy to deviate from the desired level. -->

> By default, the redundancy is set to `1` and impacts the gossiping of transactions as follows:

Reviewer 2: Here I have more a question than anything.

I see a factor as something that starts from 1. There is not 0 factor. So when I read that the target redundancy is 1, I think that there is no redundancy.

We should understand which way to measure it is more clear to the users.

Notice that in practice this does not change anything, essentially, as now `redundancy := allReceivedTxs / firstTimeTx`, where `allReceivedTxs := firstTimeTx + duplicateTxs`.

Reviewer: There's some confusion about the definition of redundancy level, which we don't define as a factor. Maybe this needs to fixed or clarified in the text.

The definition is `redundancy = duplicateTxs / firstTimeTxs`, and the spec defines special values for corner cases. That's why 0 is a valid value, even if we don't allow a target of 0 redundancy. The default target redundancy is 1.

```go
  redundancy := duplicateTxs / firstTimeTxs
  if redundancy < r.redundancyLowerBound:
    peer.send(Reset)
  if redundancy > redundancyUpperBound
    enableRouteDisabling() 
```

The number of unique and duplicate transactions is upadated as transactions come in and,
periodically (every `1s`), DOG recomputes the redundnacy of the system. 

#### Redundancy adjustment triggering

As explained, redundancy is adjusted periodicially. It is also explicitly triggered when a peer is disconnected. <!-- TODO justify why-->

### Impacted areas of code

The bulk of the changes is constrained to the mempool reactor. 

#### Breaking changes and new additions

- The `Mempool` interface is expanded with a method : 
```go

> // GetSenders returns the list of node IDs from which we receive the given transaction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// GetSenders returns the list of node IDs from which we have received a transaction.
```

> GetSenders(txKey types.TxKey) ([]nodekey.ID, error)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
GetSenders(txKey types.TxKey) ([]p2p.ID, error)
```

Author: Ok noted, we are keeping it in line with main until it gets reverted but note to change it.

``` 
- The `Entry` interface in the mempool package is expanded with a method:
```go
// Senders returns the list of registered peers that sent us the transaction.

> 	Senders() []nodekey.ID

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Senders() []p2p.ID
```

```
- We introduce a new communication channel, called `Mempool Control Channel`. The channel
is used to transmit the messages needed for the implementation of the protocol. The channel ID

> is `31` and it has a priority of `10` .

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is `31` and it has priority `10`.
```

Author: 5

of transactions in the system. 
Each node keeps track of the routes it disabled between its peers. 

```go
type gossipRouter struct {
	mtx cmtsync.RWMutex
	// A set of `source -> target` routes that are disabled for disseminating transactions. Source
	// and target are node IDs.
	disabledRoutes map[nodekey.ID]p2pIDSet
}
``` 

```go
type redundancyControl struct {
	txsPerAdjustment int64

	// Pre-computed upper and lower bounds of accepted redundancy.
	lowerBound float64
	upperBound float64

	mtx          cmtsync.RWMutex
	firstTimeTxs int64 // number of transactions received for the first time
	duplicates   int64 // number of duplicate transactions

	// If true, do not send HaveTx messages.
	blockHaveTx atomic.Bool
}

```

#### Added logic to existing functions

The overall behaviour of existing functions remains the same when DOG is disabled. 

Enabling DOG causes the following changes in behaviour:

`Receive`

The function now handles messages from two channels. The `MempoolControlChannel`
transmits `HaveTx` and `Reset` messages that keep track of routes between peers. 

`TryAddTx` 

When DOG is enabled we count the number of unique and duplicate transactions, and send

> `HaveTx` messages if the redundancy is too high. 

Reviewer 2: I thought this action was periodical, not triggered by the reception of a message.

Author: The count is done on reception, and HaveTx will be sent only then. Whether it is sent is decided periodically. 

I will clarify this but basically:
- OnNewMessage: 
   incDuplicate
       if(DogEnabled)
          if(HaveTxUnblocked)
             SendHaveTx

another process 

Every 1s {
  redundancy = computeRedundancy()
  if redundancy > threshold
      unblockHaveTx
  if redundancy < threshold
     resetRoutes

}

Once a `HaveTx` message is sent,

> sending further messages is blocked. It is unblocked by the redundancy control mechanism 

Reviewer 2: Sending what is blocked?

Author: `HaveTx`. Fixed that.

once it is triggered again. This will be discussed below, but overall the frequency
of `HaveTx` messages should be aligned with the time it takes to send a message and 
adjust routing between peers. 

`broadcastTxRoutine`

> Before sending a transaction, we filter the peers to send to based on the `disabeldRoutes`. Again,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before sending a transaction, we filter the peers to send to based on the `disabledRoutes`. Again,
```

only if DOG is enabled. 

`RemovePeer`

> When a peer is removed, we remove any existing entries related to this peer from the `DisabledRoutes` 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a peer is removed, we remove any existing entries related to this peer from the `disabledRoutes` 
```

map and explicitly trigger redundancy re-adjustment. The later is not strictly needed, but 
can lead to quicker propagation of this information through the network.

Note that we had concidered a scenario where, upon removing a peer, a node sends `Reset` messages to all its peers. 
This lead to routes beeing disabled too many times, and the process of stabilizing redundancy would be re-triggered
too frequently. The adapted logic relies in the redundancy controller to decide whether a `Reset` 
message should be sent. 

#### New p2p messages

The protocol introduces two new p2p messages whose protobuf definition is given below:

> ```proto

Reviewer 2: Does not look like proto.

type HaveTx struct {
	TxKey []byte 
}
```

```
type Reset struct {

}
```

#### Monitoring

The impact of the protocol on operations can also be observed by looking at the following metrics that already exist:

- `AlreadyReceivedTx` - the number of redundant transactions. When DOG is enabled these values should drop. 

> - `BytesReceived` - This metric shows the number of bytes received per message type. Without DOG, the transactions dominate the number of bytes, while, when enabled, the block parts dominate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `BytesReceived` - This metric shows the number of bytes received per message type. Without DOG, the transactions tend to dominate the number of bytes, while, when enabled, the block parts should dominate it.
```

> This ADR introduces a set of metrics which can be used to observe the parameters of the protocol: 

Reviewer 2: I assume these are metrics of the `mempool` module.

<!-- - `HaveTxMsgsReceived` -  Number of HaveTx messages received (cumulative). 

- `ResetMsgsSent` - Number of Reset messages sent (cumulative). -->

- `DisabledRoutes` - Number of disabled routes.

- `Redundancy` -  The current level of redundancy computed as the ratio between duplicate and unique transactions. 

### Configuration parameters

- `config.EnableDOGProtocol: bool`: Enabling or disabling the DOG protocol. `true` by default.
<!-- TODO verify this. But not a single benchmark
showed a reason to not enable it. --->
- `config.TargetRedundancy: float`: The redundancy level that the gossip protocol should aim to

>   maintain. It is `1` by default. It cannot be `0` as this would open the node

Reviewer: We defined `redundancy = duplicateTxs / firstTimeTxs`; you're thinking `redundancy = (firstTimeTxs+duplicateTxs) / firstTimeTxs`. You'd get the same if set to `1.0000000001`.

  to byzantine attacks.
   <!-- TODO should we remove this too? If yes, remove the above sentence 
  regarding operator configuration -->

In the first version of the protocol, we were inclined to expose more fine tuning
parameters to operators. But after extensive experimentation we have settled on values for 
each of them. 

> - `TargetRedundancyDeltaPercent: float`: Value in the range `[0, 1)` that defines the bounds

Reviewer: This delta parameter is a percentage, so 0.2 means 20% of the target value. 

Then the bounds are `target +- target * delta_percent`. With target = 0, the bounds are [0,0].

> - `TargetRedundancyDeltaPercent: float`: Value in the range `[0, 1)` that defines the bounds

Reviewer: In the code this parameter is an integer to make it more simple. We don't so much granularity.

the redundancy and has a chance to trigger sending of `HaveTx` or `Reset` messages. It's value is `1s`. 

#### Deriving the values of the redundancy controller

Part of the work on the protocol was extensive testing of its performance and impact of the network.
Issue [\#4320] covers the experiments performed on DOG. All the findings can be found in [TODO](link)

 We have also tested scenarios where we send the same load to 100 of the 200 nodes and DOG was able 
 to reduce the number of duplicates in the system, even under a high load. 

## User recommendation

- Entire network should use DOG. Otherwise the impact will be minimal. 

> The protocol implicitly favors routes with low latency, by cutting routes to peers that send the duplicate transaction at a later time.

- Is this true? We don't cut ties with the sender of the transaction, rather we are telling it to cut ties with some other node that has sent us the tx before that. 
So sender could still forward us transactions but not the ones received from this particular node. 

- If the frequency of `HaveTx` messages is too high, nodes will have too many routes cut.

> - Except for enabling DOG on all nodes, users do not have to change any other aspects of their application. 

Author: > So we don't support a mixed network?

We actually do. If there are nodes with DOG disabled, those will not get the protocol messages.

> - Except for enabling DOG on all nodes, users do not have to change any other aspects of their application. 

Reviewer: The new `MempoolControlChannel` will not be opened during the p2p handshake. DOG nodes will just log an error message when trying to send `HaveTx` or `Reset` messages to non-DOG peers.

# ADR 119: Dynamic Optimal Graph (DOG) gossip protocol

## Changelog

- 2024-11-04: Initial notes (@hvanz and @jmalicevic)
- 2024-11-25: Applied comments from @hvanz and added information on decided metrics (@jmalicevic)
- 2024-11-27: CAT mempool description (@hvanz)

## Status
Accepted: Tracking issue [\#3297].

## Context

The current transaction dissemination protocol of the mempool sends each received 
transaction to all the peers a node is connected to, except for the sender.
In case transactions were received via RPC, they are broadcasted to all
connected peers. 

> While resilient to Byzantine attacks, this type of transaction gossiping is 
> causing a lot of network traffic and nodes receiving duplicate transactions
> very frequently. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this approach provides resilience to Byzantine attacks and optimal transaction latency, it generates significant network traffic, with nodes receiving an exponential number of duplicate transactions.
```

Benchmarks have also confirmed a large portion of the sent and received bytes 
by the network layer of a node is due to transaction gossiping. 

DOG is a protocol that aims to reduce the number of duplicate transactions received

> while maintaining the resilience to attacks. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
while maintaining the resilience to attacks and low transaction latency. 
```

With CAT, nodes forward ("push") transactions received from users via RPC endpoints to their peers. When a node `A` receives a transaction from another node, it will notify its peers that it has the transaction with a `SeenTx(hash(tx))` message. A node `B`, upon receiving the `SeenTx` message from `A`, will check whether the transaction is in its mempool. If not, it will "pull" the transaction from `A` by sending a `WantTx(hash(tx))` message, to which `A` responds with a `Tx` message carrying the full transaction. While `SeenTx` and `HaveTx` messages are much smaller than `Tx` messages, these additional communication steps introduce latency when disseminating transactions. The CAT protocol was especially designed for networks with low throughput and large transaction sizes. 

Efforts to port the CAT mempool to CometBFT were documented in [\#2027]. Experimental results on a small testnet from [\#1472] showed that CAT effectively reduces bandwidth usage. However, its impact on latency was not evaluated in those tests. Porting CAT was finally deprioritised in favor of DOG.

### Limiting the number of peers a transaction is forwarded to

> CometBFT allows operators to configure `p2p.experimental_max_gossip_connections_to_non_persistent_peers` and `p2p.experimental_max_gossip_connections_to_persistent_peers`  as a maximum number of peers to send  transactions to. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CometBFT allows operators to configure `p2p.experimental_max_gossip_connections_to_non_persistent_peers` and `p2p.experimental_max_gossip_connections_to_persistent_peers`  as a maximum number of peers to send  transactions to ([#1558](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/pull/1558) and [#1584](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/pull/1584)). 
```

Part of the work on the protocol was extensive testing of its performance and impact on the network, as well 
as the impact of the network configuration and load on the protocol itself. 
Issue [\#4320] covers the experiments performed on DOG.

We have also tested scenarios where we send the same load to 100 of the 200 nodes. DOG was able 
to reduce the number of duplicates in the system, even under a high load, even when the target redundancy is `1`. 

After extensive testing, we did not find compelling evidence and differences in a variety of runs to varrant the
tuning of the default values chosen. We have left the target redundancy and redundancy adjustment interval 
as something operators can adjust so that users can experiment in their testnets. But none of our experiments
found a degradation in performance and correctness for these value. 

More details on the experiments used to make this decision
 can be found in Issue [\#4320].

## User recommendation

- The Entire network should use DOG. Otherwise the impact will be minimal. 

> - The protocol implicitly favors faster routes, by cutting routes to peers that send the duplicate transaction at a later time.

Author: Actually should this not be rephrased to 

The protocol implicitly favors faster routes, by cutting routes **through** peers that send the duplicate transaction at a later time.

 Overall increasing this value above `2` would lead to too many duplicates without an improvement in the tolerance of the system to byzantine attacks.  

The third parameter defines the bounds of acceptable redundancy levels: 
- `TargetRedundancyDeltaPercent: float`: Set to `0.1` (10%). It defines the bounds
of acceptable redundancy levels. The actual redundancy will be: `redundancy +- redundancy*delta`. A lower delta 
did not lead to a visible reduction in redundancy, while slightly increasing the number of control messages sent. 
We have therefore opted to not reduce this value further. It does not impact the protocol as much as the target redundancy or the redundancy adjustment interval. 

Part of the work on the protocol was extensive testing of its performance and impact on the network, as well 
as the impact of the network configuration and load on the protocol itself. 

> Issue [\#4320] covers the experiments performed on DOG.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Issue [\#4543] covers the experiments performed on DOG.
```

We have also tested scenarios where we send each transaction to 100 of the 200 nodes. Typically we only send each transaction to one node. DOG was able 
to reduce the number of duplicates in the system, even under a high load, even when the target redundancy is `1`. 

After extensive testing, we did not find compelling evidence and differences in a variety of runs to warrant the
tuning of the default values chosen. We have left the target redundancy and redundancy adjustment interval 
as something operators can adjust so that users can experiment in their testnets. But none of our experiments
found a degradation in performance and correctness for these value. 

More details on the experiments used to make this decision
 can be found in Issue [\#4320].

## User recommendation

- The Entire network should use DOG. Otherwise the impact will be minimal. 

- The protocol implicitly favors faster routes, by cutting routes through peers that send the duplicate transaction at a later time.

- If the frequency of `HaveTx` messages is too high, nodes will have too many routes cut.

-  While we did not observe any single node missing out on transactions when the lowering the target 

> reduncancy event to `0.1`, we do not advise users to do this without a strong justification and testing. 

Reviewer: We have not tested a 0.1 target with perturbations and sending each tx to multiple nodes. So no, it's not recommended.

- In networks that have slow connections between nodes (latencies bigger than 500ms), it is recommended to increase `config.dog_adjust_interval` to a higher value, at least as high as the maximum round-trip time (RTT) in the network.

## Consequences

Overall DOG reduces the bandwidth used by CometBFT, freeing up the network for consensus related messages. 
For DOG to work as expected, the entire network should be using this, although it is not required for the network
to behave correctly. It should however not be used in combination with the parameters `p2p.experimental_max_gossip_connections_to_non_persistent_peers` and `p2p.experimental_max_gossip_connections_to_persistent_peers` set to `true`.

### Positive

- Except for enabling DOG on all nodes, users do not have to change any other aspects of their application. 

> - Gossiping using DOG leads to a significant reduction in network traffic caused by transactions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Gossiping using DOG leads to a significant reduction in network traffic caused by transactions. 
  Moreover, in our experiments most metrics have improved, with no observed degradation in any area. The 
  reduction of redundant messages has a system-wide positive impact, contributing to faster consensus, lower 
  transaction latency, and more efficient resource utilization (#4606).
```

- Routes with lower latencies are implicitly favoured by cutting routes to peers that send the duplicate 

> - By cutting routes that go through a peer that sent the duplicates later in time, the protocol implicitly favors faster routes.

Reviewer: These two items are the same.

> ### Negative

Reviewer: We need to put something in Negative. I would add something like:
- It takes around 5 to 15 minutes for nodes to build a stable routing table, depending on network conditions and node configuration. This shouldn't pose a problem as it is expected for nodes to run for a long time.

> - The new protocol is not compatible with the existing experimental feature that limits disseminating transactions up to a specified number of peers. If both are enabled simultaneously, the mempool will work but not as expected.

Reviewer: I would move this under Neutral.

Efforts to port the CAT mempool to CometBFT were documented in [\#2027]. Experimental results on a small testnet from [\#1472] showed that CAT effectively reduces bandwidth usage. However, its impact on latency was not evaluated in those tests. Porting CAT was finally deprioritised in favor of DOG.

### Limiting the number of peers a transaction is forwarded to

CometBFT allows operators to configure `p2p.experimental_max_gossip_connections_to_non_persistent_peers` and `p2p.experimental_max_gossip_connections_to_persistent_peers`  as a maximum number of peers to send  transactions to ([#1558](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/pull/1558) and [#1584](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/pull/1584)). 

> This reduces bandwitdth compared to when they are disabled but there is no rule to determine which peers transactions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This reduces bandwidth compared to when they are disabled, but there is no rule to determine which peers transactions
```

> are not forwarded to. DOG can be looked at as an enahanced, more informed version of this protocol.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
are not forwarded to. DOG can be considered an enhanced, more informed version of this protocol.
```

> A node can use either this or DOG, but not both at the same time.

Reviewer 3: Having both is confusing for users imho, and we should remove the former once DOG is out.

Reviewer: I agree to remove the experimental feature.

> # libp2p's gossipSub gossiping protocol

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### libp2p's gossipSub protocol
```

 [gossipsub](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/pubsub/gossipsub/gossipsub-v1.0.md), the gossip protocol of `libp2p`, aims to reduce the bandwidth used for gossiping by limiting the number of peers a node exchange data with. The peering is controlled by a router keeping track of peering state and information about the topics peers are subscribed to. 

 Peers form meshes, where nodes within a mesh are subscribed to the same topic and the size of the mesh is defined with a configuration parameter. 

 `gossipSub` allows peers to indicate they already have a particular transaction so that other peers do not forward it to them, by sending a `IHAVE` message. That, however this is done for each individual message. DOG on the other hand, instructs peers to stop forwarding anything from a given peer with one message. 

 There is [ongoing work](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/pull/413/files) within `gossipSub` that might achieve something similar. A peer can send a message instructing another peer not to forward anything to it. DOG on the other hand blocks only one route, allowing traffic to continue through the peer.

## Decision

> The CometBFT team has decided to implement the protocol on top of the existing mempool

Reviewer 3: Is there a plan to make it default eventually?

Reviewer: Yes, it will be enabled by default. It only improves the performance; we haven't seen any disadvantage in having it enabled.

Author: Should we say so here @hvanz

Reviewer: Yes, probably it's better to make it explicit in the ADR.

(`flood` ) dissemination protocol, but make it optional. The protocol can be activated/deactivated
via a new config flag `mempool.dog_protocol_enabled`. More details on this in the sections below. 

## Detailed Design

We start the design section with a general description of how the algorithm works. The protocol is explained in detail in the accompanying [specification](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/main/spec/mempool/gossip/dog.md). 

CometBFT nodes cache received transactions and store the IDs of all the peers that have sent it in a `senders` list. 

> When an incoming transaction is in the cache, the receiving node notifies the sender that it already has that transaction. The sender will stop forwarding any transaction from the peer that had originally sent the transaction.

Author: I will clarify this, you are right. It will basically disable forwarding from the sender to the guy who said that he has the transaction.

> CometBFT caches received transactions and stores the IDs of all the peers that have sent it in a `senders` list. When a transaction enters the mempool,
> if it was already received it can be retrieved from the cache. When this happens a certain number of times, the receiving node notifies the sender to stop forwarding any transaction from the peer 
> that had originally sent the transaction. The exact point when the notification is sent is defined below as a redundancy threshold (see `Redundancy control`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CometBFT nodes cache received transactions and store the IDs of all the peers that have sent it in a `senders` list. 
When an incoming transaction is in the cache, the receiving node notifies the sender that it already has that transaction. The sender will stop forwarding any transaction from the peer that had originally sent the transaction.
```

Node `C` keeps a map of `disabledRoutes` per peer and uses it to determine whether a transaction should be forwarded. 

Entries for a particular peer are reset if a peer sends a `ResetRoute` message or if a peer disconnects.
More details on the messages exchanged to achieve this can be found in the section on newly introduced code changes. 

### Redundancy control

In an ideal setting, receiving a transaction more than once is not needed. But in a Byzantine setting, allowing for only one route for a transaction can introduce an attack vector. 

Operators can thus configure a desired redundancy and the gossip protocol will adjust route disabling based on this setting. Redundancy is defined as the ratio between duplicate and unique transactions. 

The redundancy is set to `1` and impacts the gossiping of transactions as follows:

```go
  redundancy := duplicateTxs / firstTimeTxs
  if redundancy < r.redundancyLowerBound:
    peer.send(Reset)
  if redundancy > redundancyUpperBound
    enableRouteDisabling() 
```

The number of unique and duplicate transactions is updated as transactions come in and,

> periodically (every `1s`), DOG recomputes the redundnacy of the system. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
periodically (every `1s`), DOG recomputes the system's redundancy. 
```

A redundancy of `1` implies that we allow one duplicate transaction for every unique transaction.

#### Redundancy adjustment triggering

> As explained, redundancy is adjusted periodicially. It is also explicitly triggered when a peer is disconnected. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As explained, redundancy is adjusted periodically. It is also explicitly triggered when a peer is disconnected. 
```

While not required to adjusted immediately on a disconnect, we trigger the re-evaluation of existing redundancy 

> as an optimization to speed up the time between changes in the network and the state of the syetem. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
as an optimization to speed up the time between changes in the network and the state of the system. 
```

### Impacted areas of code

The changes are constrained to the mempool reactor. 

#### Breaking changes and new additions

- The `Mempool` interface is expanded with a method : 
```go
// GetSenders returns the list of node IDs from which we have received a transaction.
GetSenders(txKey types.TxKey) ([]p2p.ID, error)
``` 
- The `Entry` interface in the mempool package is expanded with a method:
```go
// Senders returns the list of registered peers that sent us the transaction.
	Senders() []p2p.ID
```

> - We introduce a new communication channel, called `Mempool Control Channel`. The channel

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We introduce a new communication channel, called `MempoolControlChannel`. The channel
```

```

We expand the abstract definition of a mempool message with these message types as well:

```proto
// Message is an abstract mempool message.
message Message {
  // Sum of all possible messages.
  oneof sum {
    Txs txs = 1;
    HaveTx have_tx = 2;
    ResetRoute reset_route = 3;
  }
}
```
 
#### Breaking changes and new additions

- The `Mempool` interface is expanded with a method : 
```go
// GetSenders returns the list of node IDs from which we have received a transaction.
GetSenders(txKey types.TxKey) ([]p2p.ID, error)
``` 
- The `Entry` interface in the mempool package is expanded with a method:
```go
// Senders returns the list of registered peers that sent us the transaction.
	Senders() []p2p.ID
```
- We introduce a new communication channel, called `MempoolControlChannel`. The channel
is used to transmit the messages needed for the implementation of the protocol. The channel ID

> is `31` with priority `10` (for context, the mempool channel sending transaction has a priority of `5`).

Author: Yes

`HaveTx` messages if the redundancy is too high. 

Once a `HaveTx` message is sent,
sending further `HaveTx` messages is blocked. It is unblocked by the redundancy control mechanism 
once it is triggered again. This will be discussed below, but overall the frequency
of `HaveTx` messages should be aligned with the time it takes to send a message and 
adjust routing between peers. 

`broadcastTxRoutine`

Before sending a transaction, we filter the peers to send to based on the `disabledRoutes`. Again,
only if DOG is enabled. 

`RemovePeer`

When a peer is removed, we remove any existing entries related to this peer from the `disabledRoutes` 
map and explicitly trigger redundancy re-adjustment. The later is not strictly needed, but 
can lead to quicker propagation of this information through the network.

Note that we had considered a scenario where, upon removing a peer, a node sends `ResetRoute` messages to all its peers. 
This lead to routes being disabled too many times, and the process of stabilizing redundancy would be re-triggered
too frequently. The adapted logic relies in the redundancy controller to decide whether a `ResetRoute` 
message should be sent. 

> #### New p2p messages

Reviewer: I would move this section that describes the new messages at the beginning of the Detailed Design section.

too frequently. The adapted logic relies in the redundancy controller to decide whether a `ResetRoute` 
message should be sent. 

#### Monitoring

The impact of the protocol on operations can also be observed by looking at the following metrics that already exist:

- `mempool.already_received_txs` - the number of redundant transactions. When DOG is enabled these values should drop. 

- `p2p.message_send_bytes_total` - This metric shows the number of bytes sent per message type. Without DOG, the transactions tend to dominate the number of bytes, while, when enabled, the block parts should dominate it.

- `p2p.message_receive_bytes_total` - This metric shows the number of bytes received per message type. As with the metric abobe, with DOG the dominating messages should be block parts. 

The received and sent bytes metrics are reported by message type which enables operators to observe the number of `HaveTx` and `ResetRoute` messages sent.

This ADR introduces a set of metrics into the `mempool` module. They can be used to observe the parameters of the protocol: 

- `mempool.disabled_routes` - Number of disabled routes.

> - `mempool.redundancy` -  The current level of redundancy computed as the ratio between duplicate and unique transactions. 

Reviewer 3: why do some config params have a `dog` prefix while others do not? Shouldn't we either use `dog` prefix everywhere or not use it at all?

Author: We should, I did not update this section apparently, it was written before we renamed them with dog. Good catch, thanks Anton!

### Configuration parameters

- `mempool.dog_protocol_enabled: bool`: Enabling or disabling the DOG protocol. `true` by default.
The only reason for this is the incompatibility of DOG with the existing experimental feature
that disables sending transactions to all peers. 

The [specification](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/spec/mempool/gossip/dog.md) of the protocol introduces 3 additional variables. 
Out of the tree, we have made the following configuration parameters:
 

> - `mempool.dog_adjust_interval: time.Duration`: Set to `1s` by default. Indicates how often the redundancy controller readjusts 

Reviewer 3: What does it depend on? Does it have to be a configuration parameter?

Author: We ran experiments varying number of peers, tx load and target redundancy and did not see a strong indicator to change this to a particularly lower or higher value. But we left it as a config because it might be that for some users this can be too frequent.
